---
title: PS 05 -- Matching & Finite state machines
author: George McNinch
date: 2024-03-01
---

\newcommand{\pp}{\mathbf{p}}

1. A mining company needs to set up supply line between a set of
   quarries $U$ and a set of processing plants $W$. The company is
   interested in setting up perfect matchings of quarries to plants,
   i.e.  each quarry should have a supply line to a unique processing
   plant, such that no quarry or plant is on two supply
   lines. Conveniently, there are as many quarries as there are
   processing plants. Less conveniently, supply lines need to travel
   along roads. Let $E$ be the set of roads. We assume that each road in
   $E$ starts at a quarry and travels directly to a processing plant,
   and that the roads do not intersect.
   
   a. Suppose that |U| = |W| = 4 and that there are seven roads
      total. Construct an example where no perfect matching is
      possible. 
	  
	  **Suggestion**: for this problem and the rest, we suggest you model this set up as a bipartite graph.  
	  
   b. If no perfect matching exists, the company would like to know
      what is the maximal number of quarry/plant pairs such that no
      quarry or plant is on two supply chains (call this a maximal
      matching). Compute this for your example in a). How many
      additional roads must be made in order for a perfect matching to
      exist?
	  
   c. If $|U| = |W| = n$, what is the largest possible size of $E$?
      Give your answer as an expression in $n$.
	  
   d. Suppose that for each $x ∈ U$, there is exactly one road
      involving $x$, and write this edge as $x → w(x)$ for some $w(x) ∈
      W$. Explain why the size of a maximum matching is equal to the
      number of distinct nodes $\{w(x)\}$.
	  
   e. (Optional) Suppose that |U | = |W | = n and let m = |E|. Can you
      always find a configuration of roads such that a perfect
      matching is impossible? Put differently, is there a minimal m
      such that a perfect matching will exist no matter how the roads
      are placed?
	  
	  
2. A streaming service wants to model the annual growth rate of its
   subscribers. The data shows that they can roughly predict the
   behavior of customers based on how long they have been users of the
   service: Let $p_n$ be the current number of subscribers who have had
   the service for less than a year, and $p_o$ be the current number of
   subscribers who have had the service for more than a year (so in
   total there are $p_n + p_o$ subscribers).  For convenience we will
   refer to the two types of subscriber as “new” and
   “old”. 
   
   Let $\pp = \begin{bmatrix} p_n \\ p_o \end{bmatrix}$ be a vector
   recording the current subscriber population, and write $\pp^*$ be the
   subscriber population in one year’s time. Then the data shows that $\pp∗
   = A\pp$, where $A$ is the matrix given by
   $$A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0.8 & 0.5 \end{bmatrix}.$$

   This is, writing $\pp^* = \begin{bmatrix} q_n \\ q_o
   \end{bmatrix}$, there will be $q_n$ "new" users in one years time,
   and $q_o$ "old" users.

   a. What percentage of current new users will still be subscribed by
      the start of the next year?

      How does this retention rate differ for old users?
   
   c. It turns out that A has eigenvalues $λ = 1$ and $\lambda = 0.5$. Find an
      eigenvector for the eigenvalue $λ = 1$ and use it to describe the
      long term behavior of the user population for this streaming
      service.  In the long run, what will the ratio of new to old
      users be?
	  
   d. Suppose that a different streaming service has the rate matrix
      $$B = \begin{bmatrix}
	  0.5 & 0 \\
	  0.8 & 0.4 \end{bmatrix}.$$
	  
	  The matrix $B$ has $λ = 0.5$ and $\lambda = 0.4$ as its
      eigenvalues. Using the eigenvector for the larger of the two
      eigenvalues, describe the long term behavior of this streaming
      service?

   e. Suppose that both streaming services (which we will refer to by
      their rate matrices $A$ and $B$), start with the same population
      vector p this year, and that both charge $n for a yearly
      subscription. Write an expression (in terms of n, pa , pb ) for
      the total income obtained by A and B after 4 years.
