---
title: PS 07 -- Monte Carlo integration & simulations
author: George McNinch
date: 2024-03-29
---

1. Consider the function $f(x) = \dfrac{1}{x}$ defined on the interval
   $I=\left[\dfrac{1}{2},1\right]$. Note that $f$ is a decreasing
   function on the interval, and in particular

   $$\dfrac{1}{x} \le 4$$
   
   for each $x \in I$. Recall that 
   
   $$\int_{1/2}^1 \dfrac{1}{x}dx = \ln(x)\bigg\vert^1_{1/2} =
   -\ln(1/2) = \ln(2).$$

   a. If $X$ and $Y$ are random variables uniformly distributed
      respectively on the intervals $[1/2,1]$ and $[0,4]$, explain why
   
      $$P\left(\dfrac{1}{2} \le X \le 1, 0 \le Y \le \dfrac{1}{X}
      \right) = \dfrac{\ln(2)}{2}.$$
   
   b. Write a ``python`` function which takes as argument a whole
      number ``n`` and estimates $\ln(2)$ by generating ``n`` random
      points ``(x,y)`` in the region $[1/2,1] \times [0,4]$, counting
      the number ``m`` of those points ``(x,y)`` for which $y$ is
      *below* the graph $y = \dfrac{1}{x}$, and using the ratio
      ``m/n`` to produce an estimate of $\ln(2)$.
	  
	  Include the text of your function in your problem submission,
	  and include a brief explanation of how it works.
	  
	  Compare your result to ``npumpy.log(2)`` (note that ``numpy.log`` is
      the natural logarithm). How large must ``n`` be in order that
      your estimate matches ``numpy.log(2)`` to 2 decimal places?

      ----
	  
      Here are some suggestions/reminders:
   
      You should execute the following code to create a random number
      generator in ``python``:
   
      ``` python
	  from numpy.random import default_rng
	  rng = default_rng()
	  ```
   
      Now ``rng.random()`` will return a random number in the interval
      $[0,1]$.
	  
	  The ``python`` function 
	  
	  ``` python
      def estimate_log_two(n):
        # ...
        # ...
      ``` 
	  should take as
	  argument a variable ``n`` and return an estimate of $\ln(2)$; it
	  should proceed as follows:
	  
	  - generate a list ``xl`` of length ``n`` of random numbers between
        ``0.5`` and ``1``.
	  
	  - generate a list ``yl`` of length ``n`` of random numbers between
	    ``0`` and ``4``.

      - count the number ``m`` of pairs ``(x,y)`` from the list
	    ``zip(xl,yl)`` for which ``y < 1.0/x``.

      Then ``m/n`` is an estimate for $\ln(2)/2$ (why?).
	  
-------------------

*Jane's Fish Tank Emporium* (*JFTE*) revisited.
===============================================

Recall that in the course notebook, we discussed the operation of
*JFTE* by considering the question: what is the optimal ordering
strategy for fish tanks?
   
Is it *on-demand* ordering (where an order is made after a sale)?

Or is it better to have *standing orders* (where an order is made
regularly -- say, on a particular day of the week)?
  
2. In the notebook, we studied the case for which the probability of a
   customer arriving at the store on any particular day was ``1/7``.
   Let's now consider the case where the probability of the arrival of
   a customer to the store depends on the day of the week, as follows:
   
   | Day  |  Sun |  Mon |  Tue |  Wed | Thur |  Fri |  Sat |
   |------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|
   | DOW  |    0 |    1 |    2 |    3 |    4 |    5 |    6 |
   | Prob | 0.16 | 0.08 | 0.04 | 0.08 | 0.12 | 0.25 | 0.27 |


   Here the ``DOW`` ("day of week") row just indicates that we view
   ``Mon`` as day 1 of a week, ``Tue`` as day 2, etc.

   In the notebook, we constructed a ``python`` class ``JFTE`` to keep
   track of our simulations.  The *constructor* of the class ``JFTE``
   (i.e. its member function ``__init__``) creates the ``customer``
   instance variable; to do this, it invokes the function
   
   ``` python
   def customer(prob=1./7):
      return rng.choice([1,0],p=[prob,1-prob])
   ```
   
   Make an alternative to this function ``customer`` by creating a new
   function ``customer_alt`` taking an integer argument ``m`` which
   returns ``1`` with probability as indicated in the above table (for
   the ``DOW`` corresponding to ``m``) and otherwise returns ``0``.
   
   Recall that we may use ``np.mod(m,7)`` to compute the ``DOW`` of
   ``m`` e.g. the condition ``np.mod(m,7) == 3`` is ``True`` if ``m``
   is a ``Wed``.

   Now edit the code for the ``JFTE`` class, so that the ``__init__``
   function instead uses your *new* function ``customer_alt`` to
   produce the instance variable ``customers``. You can assume that
   the days for your simulations always begin on a Sunday!
   
   The notebook implemented ``strategy`` functions ``stand_order`` and
   ``order_on_demand`` which take as arguments an instance of the
   class ``JFTE``.
   
   You may now apply these ``strategy`` functions to an instance of
   the ``JFTE`` class constructed using your alternative
   customer-arrival function.
   
   Run the simulation 10 times with both strategy functions, as was
   done in the notebook. Discuss similarities/differences between the
   results obtained in the notebook.
  
   In addition to discussion, be sure to include the code for your
   function ``customer_alt`` and a summary of the results of your 10
   simulations for each strategy.

3. In this problem, let's consider again the "constant" customer
   arrival probability described in the notebook. 
   
   For each strategy ``stand_order`` and ``order_on_demand`` , compute
   the average ``storage_days`` and the average ``sales`` for 10
   simulations.  (So you'll have averages for ``stand_order`` and
   averages for ``order_on_demand``).

   If the storage costs are $1 per tank per day, use your averages to
   estimate what the profit per tank needs to be for ``JFTE`` to have
   a positive ``net_profit`` for each of these strategies.
