---
title: PS 8 -- Binomial & Poisson distribution
author: George McNinch
date: 2024-04-05
---

\newcommand{\var}{\operatorname{var}}

1. For a whole number $N \ge 1$, recall the following identity:

   $$(X+Y)^N = \sum_{j=0}^N \dbinom{N}{j} X^j Y^{N-j}$$
   
   where $X,Y$ are *variables*.

   a. Explain why the identity $(X+Y)^N = (Y+X)^N$ implies that

      $$\dbinom{N}{j} = \dbinom{N}{N-j}$$ 
	  
	  for each $0 \le j \le N$.

   b. Explain why the identity 
   
      $$(X+Y)^N = (X+Y)(X+Y)^{N-1}$$
	  $$ = X(X+Y)^{N-1} + Y(X+Y)^{N-1}$$ 
   
      implies that 
	  
	  $$\dbinom{N}{j} = \dbinom{N-1}{j} + \dbinom{N-1}{j-1}$$
	  
	  for each $0 \le j \le N-1$.
	  
   **Hint:** In each case, observe what the indicated identity says
   about the coefficient of $X^j Y^{N-j}$ in the given expression(s).
   
2. Using the identities in 1., one can argue inductively that 

   $$\dbinom{N}{j} = \dfrac{N!}{j! \cdot (N-j)!}$$
   
   (in fact, this formula has been used in the ``notebook``!)

   Use this identity to compute the following limits: 

   $$\lim_{N \to \infty} \dfrac{1}{N^3} \dbinom{2N}{3}
   \qquad \text{and} \qquad
   \lim_{N \to \infty} \dfrac{1}{e^N} \dbinom{N}{N-4}.$$

3. Suppose you have estimated the probability that your pet songbird
   will sing during a one-hour time period is ``0.35``.

   For the following, you should use the *binomial distribution*.

   a. Indicate an expression for the probability that the bird will
      sing during a ten-minute time period.
	  
   b. Indicate an expression for the probability that the bird will
      not sing during a twenty-minute time period.
	 

4. Suppose that the probability that an automobile accident occurs
   during a 24 hour period in a certain stretch of freeway is given by
   the number $p$, $0<p<1$.
   
   Assume that the random variable $X$ describing the *number of
   automobile accidents* is given by the Poisson distribution.
   
   Thus the probability that there are $k$ accidents is given by
   
   $$P(X = k) = e^{-p} \cdot \dfrac{p^k}{k!}$$
   
   Give an expression for the probability that there no more than 3
   accidents in a 24-hour period.

5. *Jane's Fish Tank Emporium* (*JFTE*) yet again

   Recall that in a [notebook] last week, we discussed the operation
   of *JFTE* by considering the question: what is the optimal ordering
   strategy for fish tanks: ordering *on-demand*?, or putting in place
   a *standing order*?
   
   [notebook]: https://colab.research.google.com/github/gmcninch-tufts/math87-notebooks/blob/master/week10/week10--monte-carlo-simulation.ipynb 
   
   
   Our simulation used a ``python`` class ``JFTE``; the *constructor*
   of the class ``JFTE`` (i.e. its member function ``__init__``)
   creates the ``customers`` instance variable. For this, the version
   in the notebook invokes the function
   
   ```
   def customer(prob=1./7):
      return rng.choice([1,0],p=[prob,1-prob])
   ```
   
   In [this-week's-notebook], we created a function ``arrival`` which
   takes two arguments: ``p`` and ``num_max``; this function returns
   the integer ``k`` with probability determined by the Poisson
   distribution and base probability ``p``, where 
   ```
   0 <= k <= num_max.
   ```
   
   Edit the ``JFTE`` class so that is constructor uses the Poisson
   distribution to simulat arrival.
   
   Recall that the constructor is the function ``__init__``; it has the form:

   ```
   def __init__(self,N,prob=1./7):
   # ...
   self.reset()
   ```

   You need to replace "``# ...``" with code to create the instance
   variable ``self.customers`` and assign it to be a list of integers
   containing ``N`` values returned by the function
   ``arrival(prob,5)``.

   You may now apply these ``strategy`` functions to an instance of
   the ``JFTE`` class constructed using the Poisson customer-arrival
   function.
   
   Run the simulation 10 times with both strategy functions, as was
   done in the notebook. Discuss similarities/differences between the
   results obtained in the notebook.


   
